PRESENTED CLAIM: Humor is more important for dating success than physical attractiveness.

AI used 8 references.

1)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The presented claim is partially supported by the study by Greengross (2011), which found that humor, as an indicator of intelligence,
predicts mating success, including the lifetime number of sexual partners. However, the study does not directly compare the importance of
humor and physical attractiveness in dating success, leaving the relative importance of these factors undetermined.
SOURCE REF:
Greengross, 2011
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'Humor ability reveals intelligence, predicts mating success, and is higher in males'
ABSTRACT: 'A good sense of humor is sexually attractive, perhaps because it reveals intelligence, creativity, and other agood genesa or
agood parenta traits. If so, intelligence should predict humor production ability, which in turn should predict mating success. In this
study, 400 university students (200 men and 200 women) completed measures of abstract reasoning (Raven's Advanced Progressive Matrices),
verbal intelligence (the vocabulary subtest of the Multidimensional Aptitude Battery), humor production ability (rated funniness of captions
written for three cartoons), and mating success (from the Sexual Behaviors and Beliefs Questionnaire). Structural equation models showed
that general and verbal intelligence both predict humor production ability, which in turn predicts mating success, such as lifetime number
of sexual partners. Also, males showed higher average humor production ability. These results suggest that the human sense of humor evolved
at least partly through sexual selection as an intelligence-indicator.'
SOURCE: (Greengross, 2011)


2)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The presented claim is partially supported by the meta-analysis conducted in 2017, which found a positive correlation between humor and
relationship satisfaction in romantic relationships, suggesting that humor may indeed play a significant role in dating success (2017).
However, the study does not directly compare the importance of humor to physical attractiveness, thus it does not conclusively establish
humor as more important for dating success than physical attractiveness.
SOURCE REF:
2017
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'Humor in romantic relationships: A meta-analysis'
ABSTRACT: 'This manuscript reports a meta-analysis of the correlation between humor and relationship satisfaction in romantic relationships,
combining 43 distinct samples from 39 manuscripts and including 15,177 participants (54.7% female) with a mean age of 34.0ayears. Drawing
from 3 theoretical dimensions of humor (i.e., within-person/relational, positive/negative, instrumental/content free), weighted mean effect
sizes were estimated for 12 distinct subdimensions of humor. All 6 positive types of humor were positively associated with relationship
satisfaction, and 4 of 5 negative types of humor were negatively associated with relationship satisfaction. Instrumental humor was
unassociated with satisfaction. In support of the proposed relational dimension, self-reported humor showed small associations with
satisfaction, while partner-perceived and relational humor showed medium and large effect sizes, respectively.'
SOURCE: ( 2017)


3)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The presented claim is partially supported by the study by Wilbur (2011), which found that humor plays a significant role in relationship
initiation and women's evaluations of potential mates' humor are predictive of their romantic interest. However, the study does not directly
compare the importance of humor to physical attractiveness in dating success, thus it does not fully substantiate the claim that humor is
more important than physical attractiveness.
SOURCE REF:
Wilbur, 2011
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'Humor in Romantic Contexts: Do Men Participate and Women Evaluate?'
ABSTRACT: 'Several lines of research illustrate that humor plays a pivotal role in relationship initiation. The current article applies
sexual selection theory to argue that humor production is a fitness indicator, allowing men to transmit information tacitly about their
underlying qualities. And whereas prior research has emphasized womenas appreciation of humor as a signal of interest, the focus here is on
how women evaluate prospective suitorsa humorous offerings. Two studies, including an ecologically valid study of online dating
advertisements, provided evidence for menas production and womenas evaluation of humor in romantic contexts. A third study revealed that
womenas evaluations of potential matesa humor are predictive of their romantic interest. Moreover, this article shows that preferences for
and perceptions of humor are associated with preferences for and perceptions of intelligence and warmth, consistent with the argument that
one function of humor is as a fitness indicator that provides information about underlying mate quality.'
SOURCE: (Wilbur, 2011)


4)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that humor is more important for dating success than physical attractiveness is not entirely supported by the study by Lundy and
Tan (1998). Their research found that while humor does increase desirability for serious relationships and marriage, particularly for men,
it only does so when the humorous individuals are also physically attractive.
SOURCE REF:
Lundy, Tan, 1998
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'Heterosexual romantic preferences: The importance of humor and physical attractiveness for different types of relationships'
ABSTRACT: 'This study examined the effects of expressions of humor and physical attractiveness on desire for future interaction in various
types of heterosexual relationships. Humor was manipulated using interview transcripts containing humorous self-deprecating responses:
physical attractiveness was manipulated using photographs. Men were found to emphasize physical attractiveness more than did women for
dating, sexual intercourse, and a serious relationship. Consistent with the Social Transformation Model of Humor introduced in this article,
individuals, particularly men, expressing humor were rated as more desirable than nonhumorous individuals for a serious relationship and
marriage, but only when these individuals were physically attractive. Humorous individuals were perceived to be more cheerful but less
intellectual than nonhumorous individuals. The Social Transformation Model appears to be a valuable way of looking at the interaction of
humor and physical attractiveness. Directions for future research based on this model are discussed.'
SOURCE: (Lundy, Tan, 1998)


5)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that humor is more important for dating success than physical attractiveness is partially supported by Bressler's (2006) study,
which found that women, but not men, preferred humorous individuals as romantic partners. However, the study also found that humorous
individuals were perceived as less intelligent and trustworthy, suggesting that humor's impact on dating success may be complex and not
universally positive.
SOURCE REF:
Bressler, 2006
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'The influence of humor on desirability'
ABSTRACT: 'Humorous interaction is a ubiquitous aspect of human social behavior, yet the function of humor has rarely been studied from a
Darwinian perspective. One exception is Miller's theory that one's ability to produce high-quality humor functioned as a fitness indicator,
and hence, humor production and appreciation have evolved as a result of sexual selection. In this study, we examined whether there are sex
differences in attraction to humorous individuals, and whether using humor influences perceptions of humorists' personality traits. We
experimentally manipulated how humorous two-stimulus persons were perceived to be by presenting them with autobiographical statements that
were either funny or not. Participants chose which person was a more desirable partner for a romantic relationship, and which individual was
more likely to have several personality traits. Only women evaluating men chose humorous people as preferred relationship partners. For both
sexes, humorous individuals were seen as less intelligent and trustworthy than their nonhumorous counterparts, but as more socially adept.
These results are discussed in light of sexual selection theory.'
SOURCE: (Bressler, 2006)


6)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that humor is more important for dating success than physical attractiveness is partially supported by Murstein's (1985) study,
which found a correlation between similarity in humor appreciation and feelings of love, liking, and predisposition to marry in college
couples. However, the study does not directly compare the importance of humor to physical attractiveness in dating success, thus the claim
may be an overgeneralization.
SOURCE REF:
Murstein, 1985
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'Humor and Interpersonal Attraction'
ABSTRACT: 'A humor test composed of cartoons, comic strips, and jokes was administered to 30 college couples (26 single, 4 married) who
rated them for humor. Subjects also stated how much they loved and liked their partner, their probability of marrying the partner, and
filled out Rubin's Liking and Love Scales. The hypotheses were that similarity of rating of the humorous stimuli would be associated with
loving, liking, and predisposition to marry. Hypotheses were confirmed.'
SOURCE: (Murstein, 1985)


7)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that humor is more important for dating success than physical attractiveness is partially supported by Howrigan's (2008) study,
which found that humor production, an indicator of intelligence, is positively correlated with general intelligence and extraversion.
However, the study does not directly compare the importance of humor and physical attractiveness in dating success, thus further research is
needed to fully substantiate the claim.
SOURCE REF:
Howrigan, 2008
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'Humor as a Mental Fitness Indicator'
ABSTRACT: 'To explain the pervasive role of humor in human social interaction and among mating partner preferences, Miller (2000a) proposed
that intentional humor evolved as an indicator of intelligence. To test this, we looked at the relationships among rater-judged humor,
general intelligence, and the Big Five personality traits in a sample of 185 college-age students (115 women, 70 men). General intelligence
positively predicted rater-judged humor, independent of the Big Five personality traits. Extraversion also predicted rater-judged humor,
although to a lesser extent than general intelligence. General intelligence did not interact with the sex of the participant in predicting
rating scores on the humor production tasks. The current study lends support to the prediction that effective humor production acts as an
honest indicator of intelligence in humans. In addition, extraversion, and to a lesser extent, openness, may reflect motivational traits
that encourage humor production.'
SOURCE: (Howrigan, 2008)


8)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The presented claim that humor is more important for dating success than physical attractiveness is supported by the previous paper, which
confirms that a good sense of humor is a significant preference in mate selection worldwide (2007). However, the paper does not directly
compare the importance of humor to physical attractiveness, leaving room for further investigation into the relative importance of these
traits in dating success.
SOURCE REF:
2007
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'The Role of Creativity and Humor in Human Mate Selection'
ABSTRACT: 'Let's face it: most people think humor is sexy. One need not scour countless scientific journal articles to reach this
conclusion. Open your favorite newspaper or magazine to the aPersonalsa section and you are bound to see plenty of people looking for a
agood sense of humora in a potential mate. Alternatively, do an impromptu pilot study and ask the next 10 people you meet how high humor
ranks on their lists of important mate characteristics; you will likely obtain similar results. Research has confirmed that a good sense of
humor is an important human mate preference worldwide (Asia: Toro-Morn & Sprecher, 2003; Europe: Todosijevik, Snezana, & Arancic, 2003;
North America: Regan & Joshi, 2002). When people are asked to rate the importance of various traits for romantic relationships, a good sense
of humor is consistently at or near the top of their lists (Hansen, 1977; Hewitt, 1958; Goodwin, 1990; Smith,'
SOURCE: ( 2007)


