PRESENTED CLAIM: The novel claim in this paper is that the positive manifold of intelligence emerges purely from beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during development, rather than being driven by a single underlying g-factor.

AI used 8 references.

1)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The presented claim aligns with the findings of van der Maas et al. (2006), who proposed a dynamical model of intelligence where the
positive manifold emerges from beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during development, negating the need for a single
underlying g-factor. The authors further suggest that this model can explain various phenomena in intelligence research, such as the
hierarchical factor structure of intelligence and the increase in heritability of g.
SOURCE REF:
van der maas dolan grasman wicherts huizenga raijmakers, 2006
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'A dynamical model of general intelligence: the positive manifold of intelligence by mutualism.'
ABSTRACT: 'Scores on cognitive tasks used in intelligence tests correlate positively with each other, that is, they display a positive
manifold of correlations. The positive manifold is often explained by positing a dominant latent variable, the g factor, associated with a
single quantitative cognitive or biological process or capacity. In this article, a new explanation of the positive manifold based on a
dynamical model is proposed, in which reciprocal causation or mutualism plays a central role. It is shown that the positive manifold emerges
purely by positive beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during development. A single underlying g factor plays no role in the
model. The model offers explanations of important findings in intelligence research, such as the hierarchical factor structure of
intelligence, the low predictability of intelligence from early childhood performance, the integration/differentiation effect, the increase
in heritability of g, and the Jensen effect, and is consistent with current explanations of the Flynn effect.'
SOURCE: (van der maas dolan grasman wicherts huizenga raijmakers, 2006)


2)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that the positive manifold of intelligence arises purely from beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during
development contradicts Jensen's (1996) assertion that the g-factor, a property of the brain, underlies all cognitive tests and is highly
stable across different algorithms, test batteries, and populations. Jensen's work suggests that the g-factor reflects the positive
correlations among virtually all cognitive functions that show individual differences, rather than being a product of developmental
interactions between cognitive processes.
SOURCE REF:
jensen, 1996
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'The g factor'
ABSTRACT: 'General ability, defined as psychometric g, arises from the empirical fact that scores on various cognitive tests are positively
correlated in the population. The g factor is highly stable across different factor analytic algorithms, across different test batteries and
across different populations. Because all cognitive tests, from the simplest to the most complex, regardless of their informational content,
are g-loaded to varying degrees, g cannot be described in terms of the tests' content, or even in psychological terms. It is actually a
property of the brain. The loadings of various tests on g, from tests of sensory discrimination and reaction time to those of highly complex
problem solving, predict those tests' degree of correlation with a number of non-psychometric variables: the test's heritability, inbreeding
depression, coefficient of assortative mating, brain size, reaction time, brain nerve conduction velocity, brain glucose metabolic rate and
features of brain evoked potentials. Although some of the brain's cognitive functions are modular, the g factor reflects the all-positive
correlations among virtually all cognitive functions that show individual differences. I hypothesize that the brain contains no module for
general problem solving. Correlations between individuals' performances in various cognitive tasks result from quantitative individual
differences in physiological conditions that do not constitute the brain's modular and other neural design features but do influence their
speed and efficiency of information processing.'
SOURCE: (jensen, 1996)


3)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that the positive manifold of intelligence arises solely from beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during
development contradicts Gottfredson's (1998) assertion of a general intelligence factor (g-factor) driving intelligence. Gottfredson posits
that the g-factor is a single underlying factor that significantly influences cognitive abilities, challenging the presented claim's
dismissal of its role.
SOURCE REF:
Gottfredson, 1998
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'The general intelligence factor'
ABSTRACT: ''
SOURCE: (Gottfredson, 1998)


4)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that the positive manifold of intelligence is purely a result of beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during
development is challenged by Garlick's (2002) study, which proposes that individual differences in neural plasticity could explain the
general factor of intelligence. Garlick's model suggests that those highly developed in one intellectual ability would also be highly
developed in other abilities, due to their enhanced ability to adapt neural connections to environmental stimuli.
SOURCE REF:
garlick, 2002
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'Understanding the nature of the general factor of intelligence: the role of individual differences in neural plasticity as an
explanatory mechanism.'
ABSTRACT: 'The nature of the general factor of intelligence, or g, is examined. This article begins by observing that the finding of a
general factor of intelligence appears to be inconsistent with current findings in neuroscience and cognitive science, where specific
connections are argued to be critical for different intellectual abilities and the brain is argued to develop these connections in response
to environmental stimuli. However, it is then observed that if people differed in neural plasticity, or the ability to adapt their
connections to the environment, then those highly developed in one intellectual ability would be highly developed in other intellectual
abilities as well. Simulations are then used to confirm that such a pattern would be obtained. Such a model is also shown to account for
many other findings in the field of intelligence that are currently unexplained. A critical period for intellectual development is then
emphasized.'
SOURCE: (garlick, 2002)


5)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that the positive manifold of intelligence is purely a result of beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during
development is challenged by Anderson (2001), who posits that individual differences in IQ may be based on differences in speed of
information processing and executive functions, particularly inhibitory processes. Therefore, the emergence of intelligence may not solely
be attributed to developmental interactions but also to individual differences in cognitive speed and executive functioning.
SOURCE REF:
Anderson, 2001
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'Conceptions of intelligence'
ABSTRACT: 'This paper argues for the scientific utility of the concept "intelligence". In the first section three common arguments against
the validity of general intelligence are discussed and dismissed. The second section presents the evidence in favour of the proposition that
individual differences in IQ may be based on differences in speed of information processing. However, the third section shows that executive
functions, particularly inhibitory processes, represent a more likely basis for the development of intelligence. The theory of the minimal
cognitive architecture underlying intelligence and development (Anderson, 1992a) shows how speed and executive functioning might represent
two dimensions to g--one an individual differences (within age) dimension based on speed and the other a developmental dimension based on
changing executive functioning. In the fourth section this theory is used to generate new insights on the nature of intellectual disability
and specific cognitive deficits and to make practical suggestions for educational intervention for low-IQ children.'
SOURCE: (Anderson, 2001)


6)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that the positive manifold of intelligence is purely a result of beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during
development is challenged by Plomin's (2001) research, which suggests that the g-factor is functionally linked by genes. Therefore, it
implies that the g-factor, a genetic component, plays a significant role in individual differences in diverse cognitive processes, not just
the interactions during development.
SOURCE REF:
Plomin, 2001
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'The genetics of gin human and mouse'
ABSTRACT: 'The g factor refers to the substantial overlap that exists between individual differences in diverse cognitive processes in
humans. In this article, I argue that a mouse model of g could provide a powerful analytic tool for exploring cognitive processes that are
linked functionally by genes.'
SOURCE: (Plomin, 2001)


7)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that the positive manifold of intelligence is solely a result of beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during
development contradicts Detterman's (2002) assertion that general intelligence, or g, can be partly explained by biological variables.
Therefore, it is likely that the emergence of the positive manifold of intelligence involves both cognitive processes and biological
factors, rather than being driven by either factor alone.
SOURCE REF:
detterman, 2002
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'General intelligence: Cognitive and biological explanations.'
ABSTRACT: 'Many researchers' assumption about g follows a logical chain of explanation: g can be explained by cognitive processes that in
turn can be partly explained by biological variables. The author considers the status of the concept of general intelligence and its
explanations with special emphasis on biological explanations. First, he discusses g as a scientific construct and itemizes the objections
that have been raised against g . Second, he considers cognitive explanations of general intelligence and whether or not such explanations
are capable of explaining g . Third, he surveys attempts to relate g to brain functioning and considers the acceptability of various
explanations that have been proposed. The emphasis in this chapter is on the potential of explaining g . (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2023
APA, all rights reserved)'
SOURCE: (detterman, 2002)


8)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The presented claim posits that the positive manifold of intelligence is a result of beneficial interactions between cognitive processes
during development, which contradicts the long-standing theory of Spearman's "g" factor as the primary driver of intelligent behavior
(Sternberg, 2002). Sternberg's (2002) work suggests that the debate over the existence of a general intelligence factor is ongoing, thus
challenging the novel claim's assertion that intelligence is purely a product of cognitive process interactions.
SOURCE REF:
Sternberg, 2002
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'The general factor of intelligence'
ABSTRACT: 'Ever since Spearman's (1904,1927) proposal of a general factor permeating all aspects of intelligent behavior, theorists of
intelligence have busied themselves trying either to prove or disprove the existence in the mind of Spearman's "g". No doubt this popular
pursuit will continue, if only because it provides a way of filling time for those who have had trouble finding other pursuits that strike
their fancy. Keywords Ideal Point Item Type Analogical Reasoning General Intelligence Human Intelligence These keywords were added by
machine and not by the authors. This process is experimental and the keywords may be updated as the learning algorithm improves.'
SOURCE: (Sternberg, 2002)


