PRESENTED CLAIM: The novel claim in this paper is that the positive manifold of intelligence emerges purely from beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during development, rather than being driven by a single underlying g-factor.

AI oppose suggests to review your claim with the 8 references below.

1)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that the positive manifold of intelligence is purely a result of beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during
development is challenged by Anderson's (2001) hypothesis, which suggests that the g intelligence factor can arise from the effect of shared
genes influencing cognitive test performance. This genetic perspective implies that the g-factor is not solely a product of cognitive
interactions, but also significantly influenced by genetic variation and mutation load.
SOURCE REF:
anderson, 2001
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'g as a consequence of shared genes'
ABSTRACT: 'Discusses a hypothesis of the role of genetics in the g intelligence factor. g can arise from the effect of shared genes
influencing cognitive test performance. Population genetics holds that a determinant of retained genetic variation is deleterious mutation
load. A simple mathematical demonstration shows that as mutations increase genetic variation, intercorrelation magnitudes become inversely
correlated to performance. The hypothesis is plausible and simple, and consistent with the puzzling effect that intercorrelations between
cognitive tests are higher at lower ability levels. The hypothesis predicts the need for a profound shift of tactics in the search for
biological bases of g. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2020 APA, all rights reserved)'
SOURCE: (anderson, 2001)


2)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The presented claim aligns with the findings of van der Maas et al. (2006), which propose a dynamical model of intelligence where the
positive manifold emerges from beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during development, negating the role of a single
underlying g-factor. The paper further supports the claim by providing explanations for key findings in intelligence research, such as the
hierarchical factor structure of intelligence and the increase in heritability of g, among others.
SOURCE REF:
van der maas dolan grasman wicherts huizenga raijmakers, 2006
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'A dynamical model of general intelligence: the positive manifold of intelligence by mutualism.'
ABSTRACT: 'Scores on cognitive tasks used in intelligence tests correlate positively with each other, that is, they display a positive
manifold of correlations. The positive manifold is often explained by positing a dominant latent variable, the g factor, associated with a
single quantitative cognitive or biological process or capacity. In this article, a new explanation of the positive manifold based on a
dynamical model is proposed, in which reciprocal causation or mutualism plays a central role. It is shown that the positive manifold emerges
purely by positive beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during development. A single underlying g factor plays no role in the
model. The model offers explanations of important findings in intelligence research, such as the hierarchical factor structure of
intelligence, the low predictability of intelligence from early childhood performance, the integration/differentiation effect, the increase
in heritability of g, and the Jensen effect, and is consistent with current explanations of the Flynn effect.'
SOURCE: (van der maas dolan grasman wicherts huizenga raijmakers, 2006)


3)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that the positive manifold of intelligence arises purely from beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during
development contradicts Jensen's (1996) assertion that the g-factor, a property of the brain, underlies all cognitive tests and is highly
stable across different algorithms, test batteries, and populations. Jensen's work suggests that the g-factor reflects the positive
correlations among virtually all cognitive functions that show individual differences, rather than being a product of developmental
interactions between cognitive processes.
SOURCE REF:
jensen, 1996
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'The g factor'
ABSTRACT: 'General ability, defined as psychometric g, arises from the empirical fact that scores on various cognitive tests are positively
correlated in the population. The g factor is highly stable across different factor analytic algorithms, across different test batteries and
across different populations. Because all cognitive tests, from the simplest to the most complex, regardless of their informational content,
are g-loaded to varying degrees, g cannot be described in terms of the tests' content, or even in psychological terms. It is actually a
property of the brain. The loadings of various tests on g, from tests of sensory discrimination and reaction time to those of highly complex
problem solving, predict those tests' degree of correlation with a number of non-psychometric variables: the test's heritability, inbreeding
depression, coefficient of assortative mating, brain size, reaction time, brain nerve conduction velocity, brain glucose metabolic rate and
features of brain evoked potentials. Although some of the brain's cognitive functions are modular, the g factor reflects the all-positive
correlations among virtually all cognitive functions that show individual differences. I hypothesize that the brain contains no module for
general problem solving. Correlations between individuals' performances in various cognitive tasks result from quantitative individual
differences in physiological conditions that do not constitute the brain's modular and other neural design features but do influence their
speed and efficiency of information processing.'
SOURCE: (jensen, 1996)


4)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The presented claim that the positive manifold of intelligence is purely a result of beneficial interactions between cognitive processes
during development is challenged by Garlick's (2002) study, which proposes that individual differences in neural plasticity could be the
underlying factor for the general factor of intelligence. Garlick's model suggests that those highly developed in one intellectual ability
would also be highly developed in other intellectual abilities due to their enhanced ability to adapt their neural connections to the
environment.
SOURCE REF:
garlick, 2002
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'Understanding the nature of the general factor of intelligence: the role of individual differences in neural plasticity as an
explanatory mechanism.'
ABSTRACT: 'The nature of the general factor of intelligence, or g, is examined. This article begins by observing that the finding of a
general factor of intelligence appears to be inconsistent with current findings in neuroscience and cognitive science, where specific
connections are argued to be critical for different intellectual abilities and the brain is argued to develop these connections in response
to environmental stimuli. However, it is then observed that if people differed in neural plasticity, or the ability to adapt their
connections to the environment, then those highly developed in one intellectual ability would be highly developed in other intellectual
abilities as well. Simulations are then used to confirm that such a pattern would be obtained. Such a model is also shown to account for
many other findings in the field of intelligence that are currently unexplained. A critical period for intellectual development is then
emphasized.'
SOURCE: (garlick, 2002)


5)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that the positive manifold of intelligence is solely a result of beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during
development contradicts Detterman's (2002) assertion that general intelligence, or g, can be partly explained by biological variables.
Therefore, it is likely that the emergence of the positive manifold of intelligence involves both cognitive processes and biological
factors, rather than being driven by either factor alone.
SOURCE REF:
detterman, 2002
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'General intelligence: Cognitive and biological explanations.'
ABSTRACT: 'Many researchers' assumption about g follows a logical chain of explanation: g can be explained by cognitive processes that in
turn can be partly explained by biological variables. The author considers the status of the concept of general intelligence and its
explanations with special emphasis on biological explanations. First, he discusses g as a scientific construct and itemizes the objections
that have been raised against g . Second, he considers cognitive explanations of general intelligence and whether or not such explanations
are capable of explaining g . Third, he surveys attempts to relate g to brain functioning and considers the acceptability of various
explanations that have been proposed. The emphasis in this chapter is on the potential of explaining g . (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2023
APA, all rights reserved)'
SOURCE: (detterman, 2002)


6)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that the positive manifold of intelligence is purely a result of beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during
development is challenged by Anderson (2001), who posits that individual differences in IQ may be based on differences in speed of
information processing and executive functions, particularly inhibitory processes. Therefore, the emergence of intelligence may not solely
be attributed to developmental interactions but also to individual differences in cognitive speed and executive functioning.
SOURCE REF:
Anderson, 2001
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'Conceptions of intelligence'
ABSTRACT: 'This paper argues for the scientific utility of the concept "intelligence". In the first section three common arguments against
the validity of general intelligence are discussed and dismissed. The second section presents the evidence in favour of the proposition that
individual differences in IQ may be based on differences in speed of information processing. However, the third section shows that executive
functions, particularly inhibitory processes, represent a more likely basis for the development of intelligence. The theory of the minimal
cognitive architecture underlying intelligence and development (Anderson, 1992a) shows how speed and executive functioning might represent
two dimensions to g--one an individual differences (within age) dimension based on speed and the other a developmental dimension based on
changing executive functioning. In the fourth section this theory is used to generate new insights on the nature of intellectual disability
and specific cognitive deficits and to make practical suggestions for educational intervention for low-IQ children.'
SOURCE: (Anderson, 2001)


7)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that the positive manifold of intelligence is purely a result of beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during
development is supported by the work of van der Maas, Kan, Marsman, and Stevenson (2017). They propose that network modeling, which
describes mechanisms at the individual level, can explain the positive correlations among intelligence subtest scores, traditionally
attributed to the g-factor.
SOURCE REF:
van der maas kan marsman stevenson, 2017
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'Network Models for Cognitive Development and Intelligence'
ABSTRACT: 'Cronbach's (1957) famous division of scientific psychology into two disciplines is still apparent for the fields of cognition
(general mechanisms) and intelligence (dimensionality of individual differences). The welcome integration of the two fields requires the
construction of mechanistic models of cognition and cognitive development that explain key phenomena in individual differences research. In
this paper, we argue that network modeling is a promising approach to integrate the processes of cognitive development and (developing)
intelligence into one unified theory. Network models are defined mathematically, describe mechanisms on the level of the individual, and are
able to explain positive correlations among intelligence subtest scores--the empirical basis for the well-known g-factor--as well as more
complex factorial structures. Links between network modeling, factor modeling, and item response theory allow for a common metric,
encompassing both discrete and continuous characteristics, for cognitive development and intelligence.'
SOURCE: (van der maas kan marsman stevenson, 2017)


8)
AI RESPONSE TO CLAIM:
The claim that the positive manifold of intelligence is purely a result of beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during
development is challenged by Deary's (2002) work, which suggests that g-factor does emerge from analyses of psychometric test scores.
Deary's research also highlights the importance of considering cognitive variables at different levels of reduction, including psychometric,
cognitive-experimental, and psychophysical, which may contribute to the emergence of g-factor and specific abilities.
SOURCE REF:
deary, 2002
SOURCE TEXT:
TITLE: 'g and cognitive 'elements' of information processing: an agnostic view.'
ABSTRACT: 'The search for cognitive elements of human mental ability differences is an interesting one to document, partly because
researchers opinions on the same data can be diametrically opposed. The author reviews previous research differences and how prior theory
affected the interpretation of these results. There are 3 things that need addressing after agreeing that g does at least emerge from
analyses of psychometric test scores: What cognitive theories and variables have been used to try to account for psychometric mental ability
differences? What is the place of g versus more specific abilities in this search? What validity do the cognitive variables and theories
have, given that they do provide variables that correlate with psychometric g ? In terms of cognitive candidates to account for human
ability differences, it is worth discerning 3 broad approaches. Cognitive variables have emerged at three different levels of reduction,
which shall be called psychometric, cognitive-experimental, and psychophysical. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2023 APA, all rights
reserved)'
SOURCE: (deary, 2002)


